Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. Gene Wolfe's popular science fiction
series, The Book of the New Sun, was published between 1980 and 1982. The series
consists of four novels, The Shadow of the Torturer, The Claw of the
Conciliator, The Sword of the Lictor, and The Citadel of the Autarch. All four
books concern a character named Severian, who belongs to a torturer's guild in
the far future of Earth. Though each volume is a complete novel, they should be
read in order, since Severian's character develops and changes as the narrative
progresses. Severian starts off as a forbidding character, dressed in a black
robe and hood. He works as a torturer, but his profession also includes acting
as an executioner. Accordingly, he carries a huge sword for chopping off heads.
We asked Wolfe if there was any impetus behind the four novels of The Book of
the New Sun. Well, there are a number of things that go together. Things come
together to create a book or to create the idea in the loose sense for a book.
In this case, I'm not sure that I can name anything terribly dramatic. One of
the things that happened was that I was at a science fiction convention, and I
attended a panel on costuming for the science fiction masquerade. And as I
listened to the various expert costumers talk about how they did it and so
forth, it occurred to me that nobody had ever done one of my characters, as far
as I knew. And, of course, I started to sulk about that. And then I thought of
what the characters looked like. And it occurred to me that one reason that no
one had done it was that I did not have very many characters who wore dramatic
and interesting clothes. And so while I was sitting there in the panel, I kind
of designed Severian's outfit for him. And with very few changes, it went into
the book in that form. The cloak, trousers, boots, bare chest, the mask, and so
forth. And a part of it was just the idea sparked by the panel, trying to
achieve a dramatic visual effect.
It seems strange to have a torturer as the main character of a science fiction
novel. A figure, after all, that doesn't fit the normal heroic pattern. What I
wanted to do was to take someone who was not obviously a hero. We have done an
awful lot of writing about people who are clearly heroes in the popular mind.
Private detectives, fighter pilots, and whatnot. I wanted to take someone who
was a villain in the popular mind and use him as my hero, as my central
character. And obviously a torturer, an executioner. Which Severian is as well
as a torturer at various parts of the book. He is such a character. And he was the
one that I fastened on. But Severian also seems to be a decent person. I think
that's precisely true. If he had been a thoroughgoing villain, then there would
have been no real purpose, as far as I'm concerned, in dealing with him in the
book. What I wanted to show is that a person could find himself in some such
situation and yet be fundamentally a decent man. More next time with Gene Wolfe.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Gene Wolfe's Book of the New Sun series is
a highly literate and complex work. Wolfe, for example, likes to include
allusions to famous works of literature. And he often uses the traditional
literary device of the tale within a tale. This happens when he suspends his
narrative about Severian, the torturer, and tells another sort of story
altogether, usually a tale with a clear moral point to it. We ask Wolfe why he
used this technique so often. Well, in the first place, because I like it
myself, and I tend to think that what... I like other readers will like it.
There are also mechanical reasons. The tale within a tale can be used as a
spacer, as a break between high climactic scenes, and it can be very useful in
that way. It can also sort of divide the book, separate the first half from the
second half, when it seems desirable to do that. I did that in the Claw of the
Conciliator, for example, in which the tale of the student and his son comes
right at the center of the book. And it's also in Sword of the Lictor, where the
tale of the boy called Frog is in the middle of the book and essentially is
splitting the halves. And you can also use it to reveal character sometimes, as
I did, for example, in the fourth book where I had the various people in the
hospital each tell a story. This, of course, is very, very old literary
technique. It goes back to the Middle Ages, at least, perhaps beyond that, for
all I know. You can use it to foreshadow things. You can also use it to show
parts of the society that would not otherwise be seen, as I tried to give a
glimpse of Foila's life on the pampas in the story in the fourth book, The
Citadel of the Autarch. Volume one of the four-volume series, The Shadow of the
Torturer, introduces a character named Baldanders, who is literally a giant
with immense physical powers. We wondered if there were any models behind Baldanders.
Oh, yeah, half a dozen things. There's a little piece of Frankenstein,
or I should say a little piece of Frankenstein, and a little piece of
Frankenstein's monster in there. That is certainly, sure, true. You'll find, I
think, a little bit of borrowing from Moby Dick in the character of Baldanders.
I borrowed the name from the Book of Imaginary Beings by Jorge Luis Boris, who
describes a monster called Baldanders who was a shape-changer, as the Tritons
and Proteus and so forth were supposed to be. And I thought it was a good name
for a character who continued to grow indefinitely, which is what Baldanders
does. In the third volume, The Sword of the Lictor, Severian and Baldanders
fight, Severian uses his sword in the giant Baldanders, a club. This sort of
fight is reminiscent of narratives of the Middle Ages, in which a knight battles
an evil giant. The image that I wanted, the Jack and the Giant killer image,
with the castle and the tower and so forth. Wolfe also refers to other science
fiction and fantasy writers. We found echoes of Jack Vance, for instance, in the
Book of the New Sun series, particularly to Vance's classic, The Dying Earth. I
owe a great deal to Jack Vance, and I'm not about to deny it. I love The Dying
Earth. I read it, I don't know how many times, probably four or five times,
sincerely. And, yeah, it's, in many ways, it's the same type of story. More with
Gene Wolfe next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. Gene Wolfe's science fiction series, The
Book of the New Sun, consists of four novels set in what appears to be the far
future of Earth. In order, the four novels are The Shadow of the Torturer, The
Claw of the Conciliator, The Sword of the Lictor, and The Citadel of the
Autarch. The overriding notion of the four volumes is the concept of the new
sun, a future time of salvation when the Earth will be cleansed and a new start
made. This almost seems to be a religious concept. We asked Wolfe if the Book of
the New Sun was indeed a religious work. Well, it is in part a religious work.
It certainly isn't wholly a religious work. What I tried to do in the book was
touch upon the things that I thought were important to mankind. One of the
important things is saving the Earth, which is something that we have only in
this century have we realized that it needed saving, but we now realize that it
does. And in the Earth is a new sun. And it's very apparent that it does. If
something isn't done, something positive, not just the kind of thing that we
have where perhaps we could save it if we would refrain from poisoning the sea
and killing the whale. But if something positive isn't done, the planet is going
to freeze. Another important element in human life is religion. And so I tried
to touch on that. I also tried to touch on the family, on raising children and
whatnot at various places in the book.
Four volumes in the series. After an effort like that, we
asked him what he could do for an encore. Well, I'm not sure that I'm going to
be called upon for an encore. I am trying to do the coda. And I have another
novel in the works, a completely unrelated novel. I'm not sure that there will
be people who will say that The Book of the New Sun is the best thing I've ever
done. And there are people who say that Peace is the best thing I've ever done.
And there are people who say that The Fifth Head of Cerberus is the best thing
I've ever done. I just try and do each book as well as I can. Wolfe is working on
a fifth volume, which will describe what happens to Severian, the protagonist of
the first four volumes. We wondered if that fifth volume would be a simple
background work rather than the full-length narrative. Well, I think that if you
want to reduce any story, any work, to the lowest common denominator, you can do
that. I assume that you could take War and Peace and do it as a soap opera or a
romance novel or something. But I don't think that that's necessarily the best
way to do it. I think that a novel should be written in a way that is compatible
to its subject matter. And I was writing about a very old society with a very
complicated history. I won't say that the society is complex. I don't think it's
as complex as ours now. But its history is much more complex than ours. And I
tried to do that in a way and with a tone that I thought was appropriate to the
setting. We'll continue our conversation with Gene Wolfe on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Gene Wolfe has been publishing highly
regarded science fiction for a number of years, but his best-known work is the
recent four-volume series, The Book of the New Sun. When we spoke with Wolfe
recently, we asked him if he had been a serious science fiction fan as a young
reader. I wasn't a fan in the sense of being a member of fandom, but when I was
growing up, fandom was very, very small. You know, I graduated from high school
in 1949. I was reading, I read the first paperback
science fiction anthology that was ever printed. That was my introduction to
science fiction. I read the old science fiction pulp magazines, like Startling
Stories, Thrilling Wonder Stories, until they went out of existence. So I was an
early reader of science fiction, yes. But I never went to a science fiction
convention until the World Con in St. Louis, which I think was 1969. He explains
how he started to write science fiction. Really, I was looking for a way to make
some money on the side, over and above my salary. I had written for the college
magazine while I was at Texas A&M, and it occurred to me that I might be able to
write some material and sell it and bring in a little extra income. My wife and
I were living in a two-room furnished apartment at the time. We'd just been
married. Neither of us had any money. And we had to have enough money to make a
down payment on furniture before we could get out of it. Writing did not turn
out to be the source of quick money that I hoped it would at the time. But I
guess I caught the bug, and I kept up with it. Wolfe has a degree in mechanical
engineering. With that sort of background, you might have expected him to write
hard science fiction, full of technology and gadgets. But he doesn't. His
science fiction is psychologically oriented and highly literary in style. We
asked him why. I don't know, except, you know, anything I would say would be
speculation. Perhaps because I deal with it daily. I'm anxious to get away from
it for a while when I'm at the typewriter. That's about the only thing I can
guess. You have to remember now that when I'm writing The Book of the New Sun or
whatever, I've been spending the previous day writing articles about hydraulic
systems or welding machines or something along those lines. I'm now for plant
engineering. I'm doing a series of three articles on industrial robots, for
example. And although I certainly have nothing against robots or welding
machines or hydraulics, you don't want to live and breathe any one thing all the
time, or at least I don't think that I do. Wolfe's Book of the New Sun, the four
-volume series about Severian the Torturer, took him five years to complete.
We wondered if writing was a great strain on him since he doesn't do it full
time. Yeah, it's difficult. But if you're a tennis player, I think it's
difficult to play good tennis. I'm not a tennis player, goodness me. But you may
nevertheless enjoy playing tennis, particularly if you do it well, or at least
you're able to convince yourself that you do it well. And I enjoy writing. It's
hard. It's hard work. It's not hard work compared to digging a big hole
in hard ground on a hot day. But it's hard work in the sense that we normally
talk about hard work, which is perhaps a little childish of it. But still, it's
something that I like to do. As for paying a price, you know, what would I be
doing with that time if I were not writing, watching reruns of MASH on TV or
something of the sort? And I really don't find that sort of thing all that
rewarding. More next time with Gene Wolfe.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson. Though science fiction author Gene Wolfe
is probably best known for his fascinating four-volume series, The Book of the
New Sun, he also writes fine short stories and novellas. Two collections of his
shorter fiction have been published so far, The Island of Dr. Death and Other
Stories and Other Stories, and Gene Wolfe's Book of Days. There are some
interesting facts surrounding one of his shorter pieces, The Island of Doctor Death
and Other Stories. It's about a boy named Tacky who's reading a science fiction
story entitled The Island of Doctor Death. He becomes so enthralled by the story,
and his own existence is so unattractive to him, that the characters in the
narrative leave the story and become part of his real life. One of the
interesting facts concerning the story is that it's written in the very rare
second-person point of view. We asked Wolfe why he wrote it that way. I think
largely as an experiment, I wanted to see if it could be done. I needed a way
of, or I felt I needed a very distinct way of setting off the material in the
book, The Island of Doctor Death, which is the book that the boy Tacky is reading
in the story, from Tacky's own story, and that was the strongest way of
contrasting the two elements that I could come up with. I needed the very strong
contrast in order to get the shock effect when the characters from the book that
Tacky was reading actually appeared in his own life, Captain Ransom and Doctor
Death himself and so forth. One of the themes of the story is the difference
between fantasy and reality. We asked Wolfe if he meant for the reader to choose
one or the other. No, what I was trying to say, I think, was that the kind of
literature that people tend perhaps to criticize children for having been reading
is actually healthier and more straightforward in most cases than the world in
which the children are actually living. So I took this, the island with the
monster race on it, the ancient monster race, and the mad scientist and so
forth, and contrasted that with Tacky's actual life experience with his mother
and the mother's boyfriend and the party and so forth.
Another interesting fact about the island of Doctor Death and other stories is the
two stories that Wolfe wrote soon afterwards. One is entitled The Death of Dr.
Island, and the other is called The Doctor of Death Island. We asked Wolfe why
he wrote these other two. I get them mixed up myself. The Death of Dr. Island
was simply that I was talking to Joe Hensley, and The Island of Doctor Death and
other stories and other stories had lost, pardon me, The Island of Doctor Death and
other stories had lost the Nebula, and it had lost to no award. It's the only
history in the history of science fiction writers of America to lose that award
to no award. Joe Hensley said you should write one called The Death of Dr.
Island, and that would win for sure. And he said it as a joke, of course. And I
thought, well, he thinks I can't do it. I bet I can do it. So I started thinking
about what kind of a story would go with that title, who Dr. Island might be,
and what The Death of Dr. Island might be, and so forth, and came up with that
story. And then why did he go on to write The Doctor of Death Island? Well, I
wanted to see if I could do it again. People kept coming up to me and giving me
various switches on that title because the business with the titles caught a number
of people's fancy. And so I thought, well, I'll try it again and see if I can do
it a third time. And I could, but it was sufficiently difficult that I didn't
get terribly interested in trying to do it a fourth time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.